Candida albicans can invade humans and may lead to mucosal and skin infections or to deep-seated mycoses
of almost all inner organs, especially in immunocompromised patients. In this context, both the host immune status and
the ability of C. albicans to modulate the expression of its virulence factors are relevant aspects that drive the candidal
susceptibility or resistance; in this last case, culminating in the establishment of successful infection known as candidiasis.
C. albicans possesses a potent armamentarium consisting of several virulence molecules that help the fungal cells to
escape from the host immune responses. There is no doubt that the secretion of aspartic proteases, designated as Saps, is
one of the major virulence attributes produced by C. albicans cells, since these hydrolytic enzymes participate in a wide
range of fungal physiological processes as well as in different facets of the fungal-host interactions. For these reasons,
Saps clearly hold promise as new potential drug targets. Corroborating this hypothesis, the introduction of anti-human
immunodeficiency virus drugs of the aspartic protease inhibitor-type (HIV PIs) have emerged as new agents for the
inhibition of Saps. The introduction of HIV PIs has revolutionized the treatment of HIV disease, reducing the
opportunistic infections, especially candidiasis. The attenuation of candidal infections in HIV-infected individuals might
not solely has not only resulted from improved immunological status, but also as a result of direct inhibition of
C. albicans Saps as well as the blockage of several biological processes controlled by these proteolytic enzymes. The
present article will discuss the updates on the functional implications of HIV PIs on the development of candidiasis. CANDIDA ALBICANS: AN OPORTUNISTIC
FUNGAL PATHOGEN
 Candida albicans is a polymorphic fungus (Fig. 1),
which belongs to the normal microbial flora of human
beings, colonizing the skin and the gastrointestinal and
urogenital tracts. Under normal circumstances, the yeast
lives as a harmless commensal on mucosal surfaces in
healthy individuals, existing in equilibrium with the
microbial flora, the host’s epithelial tissues, the host’s
immune defenses and other local environmental conditions.
However, disturbance of this balance can result in
uncontrolled growth of C. albicans lead to infections of
either the skin or mucosal surfaces and more aggressively
the invasion of deeper mucosal tissue, culminating in the
dissemination to other organs. Hence, C. albicans causes
several types of infections in predisposed patients (Table 1),
ranging from superficial to life threatening diseases [1-4].
Impressive numbers were published regarding Candida
infection: (i) in North American hospitals, Candida spp. cause around 10% of intensive care unit-acquired
bloodstream infections and represent the third or fourth
commonest bloodstream pathogen with a mortality rate of
30-50% [5-9]; (ii) approximately 75% of all women
experience vulvovaginal candidiasis during their lifetime and
a significant proportion (5%) of all adult women suffer from
recurrent infections [10, 11]; and (iii) in HIV-positive
individuals, oral and esophageal candidiasis is considered as
an acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)-defining
illness with 80-90% of these individuals, without
intervention with highly active antiretroviral therapy
(HAART), suffering recurrent episodes during the course of
their illness [12, 13]. How the transition from a harmless
commensal to an aggressive pathogen is triggered is not fully
understood. However, C. albicans possesses a potent arsenal
of molecules (virulence attributes) that help it to adapt, to
interact with host structures and to circumvent the host
immune responses. Furthermore, this fungus has an
impressive ability to quickly alter its gene expression in
response to environmental stimuli, such as changes in
nutrient availability, pH, osmolarity, temperature or attack
by cells of the immune system [14-16]. As a consequence,
C. albicans presents an extraordinary ability to successfully
infect virtually every anatomical site of the human body,
being one of the most relevant and the most frequently
isolated fungal pathogen in hospitals, which is directly associated with a prolonged hospital stay, especially in the
intensive care unit, and a resulting rise in care costs [17-21].
2. VIRULENCE FACTORS
 Polymorphism of C. albicans (Fig. 1), enabling
morphological plasticity in response to environmental
changes, is known to contribute to its virulence process.
Yeast-to-hyphae differentiation (dimorphism) of C. albicans
is associated with destruction and invasion of host structures
(extracellular matrices, cells and tissues) [22]. Interestingly,
the transcriptional programs associated with dimorphism
genes also influence and are linked to the expression of other
virulence factors [14]. In this sense, a number of fungal
attributes, such as the expression of adhesion factors (e.g.,
surface mannoproteins), directed growth/thigmotropism,
stress adaptation, metabolic flexibility, ability of phenotypic
switching, capability to form biofilm in numerous substrates,
and the secretion of hydrolytic enzymes such as lipases,
phospholipases and proteases are directly implicated in the
infectious process [16, 23-28]. 
2.1. Aspartic Proteases
 The secretion of aspartic proteases has long been
recognized as a virulence associated trait of this fungal
pathogen [29]. The secreted aspartic proteases (Saps) of
C. albicans, which are encoded by a family of 10
homologous genes (SAPs1-10), are known to contribute to
the fungal pathogenicity due to the participation in several
facets of the infective process, including (i) degradation of
tissue barriers (e.g., extracellular matrix/basal membrane and
surface membrane proteins) during invasion; (ii) destruction
of host defense molecules by cleavage of different classes of
immunoglobulins, complement proteins, proteinaceous
protease inhibitors, cytokines and antimicrobial peptides;
(iii) nutrition and (iv) adherence to both abiotic substrates
(e.g., medical devices like catheters, prosthetic valves,
artificial dentures and others) and biotic surfaces (e.g., cells and tissues) [26, 30-32] (Fig. 2). Due to their wide substrate
specificity and broad pH range (2.0-7.0), it is accepted that
Saps contribute to the development of active C. albicans
infections, making them interesting targets for new
antifungal drugs [33-36]. This is supported by the fact that
some of the HIV aspartic protease inhibitors (PIs) in clinical
use have inhibitory effects against C. albicans both in vitro
and in vivo [36-38]. In addition, the increasing emergence of
strains of C. albicans resistant to the commonly used
antifungal agents has made clinical management of
candidiasis increasingly difficult and emphasizing the need
for improved drug therapies [39-41]. 3. HIV PIs: ANTI-C. ALBICANS PROPERTIES
 Inhibitors of HIV-encoded aspartic protease (Table 2),
combined with nucleoside analogs with antiretroviral
activity, caused profound and sustained suppression of viral
replication, increased CD4+ T lymphocyte cell counts,
stimulated the survival and activation of neutrophils,
monocytes and endothelial cells, reduced morbidity and
mortality, promoted an improvement in the quality and
prolongation of life, arresting the progression of the HIV/AIDS condition, with a dramatic fall in HIV-related opportunistic
infections [42-45]. In this sense, clinical evidences showed
that the inclusion of aspartic PI in the HAART, the
therapeutic scheme used to treat HIV-infected individuals,
severely diminished the frequency of oropharyngeal
candidiasis, being considered a clinical marker for disease
progression [46-49]. For instance, in a multinational cohort
study involving 6,941 HIV-positive individuals from
Australia and ten European countries, when comparing the
periods 1997-2001 and 1994-1996, there was a significant
HIV PI-induced decrease in the progression of candidiasis
from 17.0% to 5.7% [50]. The positive impacts of HAART
on quality of life, mental health, labor productivity and
economic well-being for people living with HIV/AIDS have
also been documented [51-54]. Moreover, several works
have demonstrated the direct antifungal actions of the HIV
PIs against C. albicans [reviewed in 33 and 35]. The
attenuation of candidal infections in HIV-infected individuals in the HAART era might not solely have resulted
from improved immunological status, but also as a result of
direct inhibition of Candida Saps by the HIV PIs contained
in HAART [33], since the production of proteases by C.
albicans and HIV-1 belongs to the same catalytic type
(Table 3).
 Published works demonstrated that indinavir, saquinavir,
ritonavir, nelfinavir and amprenavir (Fig. 3) were able to
restrain the proteolytic activity of purified Sap1, Sap2 and
Sap3 in a concentration-dependent manner [55-61]. The
binding of the HIV PIs to the active sites of Saps produced
by C. albicans blocks the binding of substrate to the enzyme
that results in an incapability of the microorganism to obtain
peptides and amino acids to its nutrition, leading to a
reduction or a complete interruption in the proliferation rate.
Corroborating this finding, HIV PIs were capable in
arresting the proliferation and development of C. albicans
yeasts when cultured in defined medium supplemented with
large protein (e.g., albumin or hemoglobin) as a unique
source of nitrogenous compound [35, 57, 58, 61]. In
addition, the yeast-to-hyphae differentiation process, which
is a hallmark event during the pathogenesis of C. albicans
[62], was delayed by the treatment with indinavir [57] and
inhibited by amprenavir in a dose-dependent way [35, 61].
 HIV PIs perturbed the ultrastructural architecture of
C. albicans cells, inducing several and drastic alterations on
the surface layer. For instance, the treatment with
amprenavir [61] promoted the removal of the amorphous
layer that covers the entire surface of C. albicans, turning the
rough surface into a smooth one, as evidenced by scanning
electron microscopy. Moreover, amprenavir-treated yeasts
had invaginations and deformations in the cell shape [61].
These irreversible effects corroborate the anti-proliferative
properties of the HIV PIs on C. albicans growth and
development [35]. Surface-located molecules can act as
adhesive structures [63]; consequently, their inhibition
(synthesis and/or exposition) can diminish the ability of
C. albicans cells to interact with host structures. In this line
of thinking, HIV PIs reduced the expression/exposition of
surface molecules, including Saps, mannose- and sialic acidrich
glycoconjugates and sterol [57, 61]. In addition, HIV PIs
significantly diminished the secretion of hydrolytic enzymes
to the extracellular environment, including Saps,
phospholipase and esterase [35, 56, 61, 64]. Overall, the
removal of these surface structures culminates in the
inability of this fungus to adhere to abiotic (e.g., plastic and
acrylic materials), which inhibits the biofilm formation [35,
61, 65], and biotic substrates (e.g., different epithelial cell
lineages) [35, 55, 59, 66-68].
 Two HIV PIs, indinavir and ritonavir, promoted a
therapeutic effect in an experimental model of vaginal
candidiasis, with an efficacy comparable to that of
fluconazole, a recognized anti-C. albicans drug [56]. Also,
the anti-Sap effect of HIV PI was associated with clinical
resolution of oral candidiasis in HIV-positive patients [69].
In that elegant study, Cassone and co-workers [69] carried
out a controlled, randomized, longitudinal study in which
therapy-naive HIV-positive subjects receiving PI-HAART
were matched with subjects under an non-nucleoside reverse
transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTI)-HAART regimen, all patients being followed up for oral candidiasis incidence,
oral Candida carriage, immunoreconstitution and Sap levels
in the oral cavity. The results demonstrated that PI-HAART
regimen was extremely beneficial against oral candidiasis,
since of the 80% Sap-positive subjects at the beginning of
the treatment more than half no longer presented Sap in their
saliva after two weeks of treatment and almost all subjects
converted to Sap negativity after 30 days of treatment.
Contrarily, the Sap positive subjects receiving NNRTIHAART
maintained their positivity after 30 days and the
majority had Sap in the saliva for the whole duration (180
days) of follow-up [69]. Interestingly, the combination of
classical antifungal agents (e.g., fluconazole) and HIV PI
(e.g., saquinavir) both at sub-inhibitory concentrations was
effectively demonstrated against strains of C. albicans
isolated from HIV-positive patients [70]. Collectively, these
findings emphasize the idea that HIV PI treatment had
advantageous clinical efficacy against candidiasis.
4. NEW APPROACHES FOR IMMINENT PROSPECTS
 The inhibitory effects of HIV PIs both in in vitro and in
vivo experimental models were observed at concentrations
(micromolar range) higher than those needed for HIV-1
protease inhibition (nanomolar or subnanomolar). This
probably reflects a much lower affinity of these drugs for
Sap than that for HIV-1 protease [33, 71]. Another
explanation is that, in contrast to the very small and
structurally simplified HIV-1 protease (a homodimeric
enzyme of the A2 protease family) (Table 3), Saps are larger,
more complex and monomeric enzymes with 2-fold internal symmetry [72, 73]. They possess a relatively large active site
which might be responsible for the broader substrate
specificity and also their susceptibilities to distinct aspartic
PIs [72]. Nonetheless, the above HIV PI concentrations may
be achieved under current HAART regimens both in the
blood [71], in human saliva (at least for indinavir) [74] and
in lungs (at least for lopinavir) [75].
 Two standpoints arose regarding the use of aspartic
protease inhibitors against C. albicans: (i) the pivotal need
for synthesis of new compounds, more effective and more
specific to fit the active site of Saps, leading to a stronger
inhibition of the proteolytic activity and (ii) the looking for
novel target in the Candida cells to the binding of aspartic
PIs. Regarding the last proposal, White and co-workers [76]
identified an orthologous of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Ddi1 protein as the only member of the aspartic protease
family in Leishmania promastigote cells, being this protein
as the major target to the binding of the HIV PIs. Ddi1
belongs to a family of proteins known as the ubiquitin
receptors, which have in common the ability to bind
ubiquitinated substrates and the proteasome [77]. The
remarkable structural similarity between the central domain
of Ddi1 and the retroviral proteases, in the global fold and in
active-site detail, suggests that Ddi1 functions proteolytically
during regulated protein turnover in the cell, being a key
molecule in the maintenance of cellular homeostasis [77].
The Ddi1 protein of the yeast S. cerevisiae is involved in a
wide range of functions, including protein targeting to the
proteasome, control of cell cycle and suppression of protein
secretion from the cell [78]. The search for Ddi1 homologous
sequence in C. albicans can help in understanding the
antifungal effect of HIV PIs.
5. CONCLUSIONS
 Fungi are eukaryotic microorganisms that are closely
related to humans at both cellular and biochemical levels,
which make the treatment of mycosis difficult [79]. In
addition, the emergence of drug resistance to antifungals and
problems of toxicity and poor delivery of drugs at the target
site in systemic infections generated the urgent necessity to
find novel fungal targets as well as the discovery of more
effective antifungal compounds [79]. In this scenario, Saps
emerge as potential therapeutic target due to their
participation in multiple relevant physiological and pathological events performed by C. albicans (Fig. 2).
Inhibition of Sap produced by C. albicans, particularly
Saps1-3, by the aspartic PIs used in the anti-HIV
chemotherapy raised the curiosity of researchers around the
world [80]. HIV PIs markedly improved the immunity of
HIV-positive individuals and decreased significantly the
infections caused by fungi, especially candidiasis. A huge
number of studies revealed the capability of these bioactive
pharmacological compounds to block crucial vital events of
C. albicans, including nutrition, proliferation, growth,
differentiation and interaction with host structures (e.g., cells
and bioactive proteins), which culminated in the inability to
sustain an infectious process (Fig. 2). Looking to the future,
the generation of more-specific Sap inhibitors with high
selective toxicity against C. albicans would probably
represent a therapeutic breakthrough in the fight against
candidiasis and other diseases caused by aspartic proteaseproducing
pathogens. Combination therapies that target not
only essential genes but also important virulence factors that
are essential for certain steps in infection (e.g., Saps) could
be attractive in the treatment of C. albicans infections.
Prospect research into the synergistic capabilities of
inhibitors will help elucidate the most effective combination
therapies to be used against candidiasis. 